initial draft of IRCV3BEARER (#545)
ircv3/ircv3-specifications: extensions/ircv3bearer.md

---
title: IRCV3BEARER SASL mechanism
layout: spec
work-in-progress: true
copyrights:
  -
    name: "Shivaram Lingamneni"
    period: "2024"
    email: "slingamn@cs.stanford.edu"
---

## Notes for implementing work-in-progress version

This is a work-in-progress specification.

## Introduction

IRC server implementations may wish to defer authentication to various external systems (e.g. single-sign-on systems). Some of these systems are capable of publishing bearer tokens, i.e., opaque tokens that carry authorization and authentication data, and which can be subsequently be validated by the same system or a cooperating system.

> [SASL](sasl-3.1.html) is the standard authentication protocol used in IRC; it offers different mechanisms corresponding to different methods of authentication. Although some bearer tokens have associated SASL mechanisms (for example, OAuth2 has [RFC 7628](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7628.html)), there is no general mechanism associated with the concept of bearer tokens. This specification defines a new mechanism `IRCV3BEARER` for processing bearer tokens in the context of IRCv3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[SASL](sasl-3.1.html) is the standard authentication protocol used in IRC; it offers different mechanisms corresponding to different methods of authentication. Although some bearer tokens have associated SASL mechanisms (for example, OAuth2 has [RFC 7628](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7628.html)), there is no general mechanism associated with the concept of bearer tokens. This specification defines a new mechanism `TOKENBEARER` for processing bearer tokens in the context of IRCv3.
```

Suggestion: SASL mechanisms are supposed to be protocol agnostic so a more generic name like this might be better?

Reviewer 2: Whatever the name is, it should be sent to http://www.iana.org/assignments/sasl-mechanisms/sasl-mechanisms.xhtml

Reviewer 3: I'm not an expert in the RFC process but I did some further reading today and I think [RFC7628](https://www.iana.org/go/rfc7628) might be doing on what was intended with JWT. 

The RFC handles the authentication using bearer tokens which are  being issued primarily by the OAUTH framework. JWT is one token format which is valid inside the OAUTH framework.

Given the examples and under further considerations it is pointed out that JWT is a SASL compatible container format for such a token and can be used for the authentication process.

Author: @KlaasT not sure if I understood you, but if you're suggesting that arbitrary tokens can be sent via the existing OAUTHBEARER mechanism defined by RFC 7628, I don't think that makes sense. And this specification effort is intended to support arbitrary tokens.

If you're saying that OAUTHBEARER is adequate for your intended use case, there is indeed prior art for integrating OAUTHBEARER into IRCv3: https://emersion.fr/blog/2022/irc-and-oauth2/

Reviewer 3: Hi @slingamn 

my intent is not to send arbitrary tokens through the OAUTHBEARER mechanics of RFC7628. My intent is to stay within the definition of the RFC. Maybe we just have a misunderstanding here :)

JWTs are a standardised format (RFC 7519) and commonly used as bearer tokens in OAuth 2.0 ecosystem.

From my understanding the OAUTHBEARER mechanism doesn’t impose strict constraints on the token’s internal structure beyond being a valid OAuth 2.0 token, which JWTs satisfy when issued by a trusted authority. 

According to the RFC, OAUTHBEARER already supports JWTs as is, provided of course the server can validate them.

Furthermore a server is not forced to contact an OAUTH server for JWT validation as they are signed and self contained. The use of external resources for JWTs, even in the OAUTH process, is optional (correct me if I'm wrong), as they are able to hold all information needed for verification.

That blog post you linked is very interesting. Thanks for that one. I see it though trying to lean into the full OAUTH 2.0 handshake, while we could have it simpler, without the need to implement the entire stack.

Maybe I have missed something entirely and I am happy to discuss. But from what I see we could use this mechanism to accept JWTs as a RFC compliant token type, verify and validate them. Keeping it open for later implementations of further compatible mechanisms and protocols.

Just to add I found this over at Kafka which basically does the same thing, if I understood it right: https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=75968876

So to close this wall of text (sorry for that), I don't want to invalidate your work on this extension. I think it is great and we do align in many things in that extension. Only thing I am concerned is that the mechanism we are searching for is in fact already present and called OAUTHBEARER.

Introducing a new mechanism and going through IANA, as proposed earlier, would probably take a long time.

Author: @KlaasT I think maybe we should talk out of band, would you like to [email me](https://cs.stanford.edu/people/slingamn/)?

## Implementation

Servers implementing this specification MUST implement [capability negotiation at level 302 or higher](capability-negotiation.html), as well as the [sasl capability](sasl-3.1.html).

> A bearer token type is a case-sensitive identifier conforming to the [message tags](message-tags.html) grammar for `<key_name>` tokens. This specification defines two bearer token types, `oauth2` and `jwt`. Additional bearer token types may be defined; they SHOULD either use a vendor prefix, or be registered with IRCv3.

Reviewer: Can we also have an `opaque` token type here for opaque tokens?

> A bearer token is an opaque string of bytes. Bearer tokens MUST NOT contain the NUL byte.

Author: Upon further consideration this restriction doesn't seem very useful. Thoughts on either (a) allowing NUL (b) requiring non-NUL UTF8 (c) requiring printable ASCII (`0x20` through `0x7e` inclusive), as OAuth does?

Reviewer: Allowing NUL here would break the wire format which explicitly bans that.

In order to authenticate to a server by means of a bearer token, a client first obtains a bearer token of the desired type, then initiates a SASL conversation with the server using the mechanism `IRCV3BEARER`. This mechanism consists of a single message from the client to the server, having the form:

    <message>   ::= [authzid] NUL <token_type> <token>

where the optional authzid (authorization identity) is as specified by [RFC 4616](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4616).

## Bearer token types

The `oauth2` bearer token type is intended to transport OAuth 2.0 bearer tokens, as defined by [RFC 6750](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6750).

The `jwt` bearer token type is intended to transport JSON Web Tokens (JWT), as defined by [RFC 7519](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519).

## Examples

> This is an example of successful authentication with the `jwt` bearer token type:

Reviewer 4: Presumably the token type is opaque to the client and an implementation detail of the server and/or IdP? The client is merely a bearer of a token, what it is isn't important for it. 

Therefore I'd perhaps not call out that it is a JWT token specifically here.

Author: A precedent for what I'm trying to do here is the "token type hint" as defined by [RFC 7662](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7662#section-2.1):

1. This is a hint to the server to speed up recognition of the token; if the hint is not recognized, the server can fall back to exhaustive search over all possibilities for validating the token, although this may be undesirable for performance reasons
2. Although the hint may be implementation-defined, it is preferable that it be registered: [here's the registry for OAuth token type hints](https://www.iana.org/assignments/oauth-parameters/oauth-parameters.xhtml#token-type-hint)

C: AUTHENTICATE N0pscTVsOWJTMGRCbm9oZWE0RnVxSnIyMzJqZS1kbFJWa2JDYTducm5GbXNJc2V6c2dBM0piX2o5WnVfaXY0NjB0X2QyZWF5dGJWcDlQLURPVmZ6VWZrQnNLcy04MVVSUUVuVGpXNnV0NDQ1QUp6MnB4alg5MlgwR2RtT1JwQWtR
S: :server.test 900 * * slingamn :You are now logged in as slingamn
S: :server.test 903 * :Authentication successful
C: NICK slingamn
C: USER u s e r
C: CAP END
S: :server.test 001 slingamn :Welcome to the IRC Network slingamn
```

## Implementation considerations

This section is non-normative.

This specification does not specify how token types are to be discovered, or how tokens are to be issued or validated. In general, it will be necessary to configure both client and server out of band so that they agree on these issues. However, the possibility is open for a future specification to allow client discovery of available token types and issuance mechanisms.

> Extraction of the IRC account name (or other applicable IRC-level authentication data) from the token is left implementation-defined, as part of the validation process. However, the `oauth2` token type is intended for validation via an [OAuth 2.0 introspection endpoint](https://www.oauth.com/oauth2-servers/token-introspection-endpoint/); in this case, the server will typically validate the `active` member of the introspection response, then use the `username` member as the client's IRC account name. For the `jwt` token type, possibilities include using the local-part of a `sub` claim formatted as an e-mail address, using the `preferred_username` claim as defined by the [IANA JWT claims registry](https://www.iana.org/assignments/jwt/jwt.xhtml), or using a custom claim.

Reviewer 4: Perhaps it would be more appropriate to link to the specification instead of a third-party company website.

```suggestion
Extraction of the IRC account name (or other applicable IRC-level authentication data) from the token is left implementation-defined, as part of the validation process. However, the `oauth2` token type is intended for validation via an [OAuth 2.0 introspection endpoint](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7662); in this case, the server will typically validate the `active` member of the introspection response, then use the `username` member as the client's IRC account name. For the `jwt` token type, possibilities include using the local-part of a `sub` claim formatted as an e-mail address, using the `preferred_username` claim as defined by the [IANA JWT claims registry](https://www.iana.org/assignments/jwt/jwt.xhtml), or using a custom claim.
```
